Before we dive into the details of the Kalman filter,
it's important to understand a few intricacies of
robot operation that will give context to why a Kalman filter works the way it does.
Let's explore two different robot worlds,
the ideal world and the real world.
In both worlds, the robots know their starting positions.
In the ideal world,
the robot is instructed to move 10 meters forward.
The robot proceeds to do so,
and stops precisely 10 meters from its starting position.
The movement was error-free.
The robot in the real world is also asked to move forward 10 meters.
In the real world, however,
there are few complexities that result in the robot's movement being imprecise.
The robot may encounter imperfections in the terrain,
experience wheel slip, or be adversely affected by other factors in its environment.
Upon completion of its movement,
the robot may not be at the 10-meter mark precisely,
but some distance ahead of or behind of its desired goal.
This error will be different with every movement
performed due to the randomness encountered in the environment.
Let's look at this movement on a graph.
If we were to record the real world robot moving 10 meters forward a total of 100 times,
the results would look like this data here.
The roboticist with a keen eye may notice that this data resembles a bell curve,
also known as a Gaussian.
This graph displays a probability distribution of
the robot's final position after multiple iterations of the movement.
The X-axis represents the distance traveled by the robot,
and the Y-axis represents how often the robot stopped at that distance.
This curve shows that if we were to ask a robot to move,
it is most likely to stop at the 10-meter mark,
but at times, can find itself as far off as the 12-meter mark.
The shape of the Gaussian is specific to
the robots and the environment that it is operating in.
If the robot was driving around a factory floor,
there'd be fewer environmental factors to affect it,
so its movement would be more precise,
and its distribution more narrow.
On the other hand, if the robot is performing rescue missions,
it may have any number of environmental factors affect it,
such as adverse weather,
or unexpected movements due to unstable terrain.
The result is a much wider Gaussian distribution,
but the distribution of the uncertainty is not the only problem here.
If a robot were to continue to take blind movements one after the other,
then its location would become less and less certain with every movement.
You can see this displayed on the graph.
Every movement is uncertain,
and these uncertainties stack up over time.
With all of these uncertainties in motion,
a robot needs a way to sense its own action.
But unfortunately, sensory data is often uncertain, too.
Let's go back to our two robot worlds to explore this.
Let's say that we are interested in knowing the speed of a robot,
and that we have sensors on-board the robot to measure this.
In the ideal world,
the sensor will measure the speed of the robot accurately,
and respond to changes in the speed instantaneously.
However, in the real world,
sensor measurements will contain some amount of noise.
An expensive encoder may come close to what you would expect in an ideal world,
but if you're using hobbyist grade robotic sensors,
they will exhibit imperfect measurements.